Az 900 Azure Fundamentals
https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/learn/paths/azure-fundamentals/
1. Vertical scaling, also known as "scaling up", is the process of adding resources to increase the power of an existing server. Some examples of vertical scaling are: adding more CPUs, or adding more memory.
2. Horizontal scaling, also known as "scaling out", is the process of adding more servers that function together as one unit. For example, you have more than one server processing incoming requests.
3. If you need to store large amount of data that is not accessed frequently then try using Data Warehouse or Data lake
4. If fthe data is is accessed frequesntly then use Azure SQL or Azure Psotgres or Cosmos DB
5. You can visulize your data in Data Warehouse and Data lake using PowerBI.
6. Azure ScaleSets lets you manage 100s of VMs running the same application with same configs
7. Azure AD Protection let you enable and manage and enforce MFA for Users
https://docs.microsoft.com/en-gb/learn/modules/welcome-to-azure/3-tour-of-azure-services
8. Compute Service of Azure:
        Azure Virtual Machines - Windows or Linux virtual machines (VMs) hosted in Azure
        Azure Virtual Machine Scale Sets-	Scaling for Windows or Linux VMs hosted in Azure
        Azure Kubernetes Service-	Enables management of a cluster of VMs that run containerized services
        Azure Service Fabric-	Distributed systems platform. Runs in Azure or on-premises
        Azure Batch	- Managed service for parallel and high-performance computing applications
        Azure Container Instances-	Run containerized apps on Azure without provisioning servers or VMs
        Azure Functions-	An event-driven, serverless compute service

9. Storage Service
        Azure Blob storage-	Storage service for very large objects, such as video files or bitmaps
        Azure File storage-	File shares that you can access and manage like a file server
        Azure Queue storage-	A data store for queuing and reliably delivering messages between applications
        Azure Table storage-	A NoSQL store that hosts unstructured data independent of any schema

10. Networking services
        Azure Virtual Network-	Connects VMs to incoming Virtual Private Network (VPN) connections
        Azure Load Balancer-	Balances inbound and outbound connections to applications or service endpoints
        Azure Application Gateway-	Optimizes app server farm delivery while increasing application security
        Azure VPN Gatewa-y	Accesses Azure Virtual Networks through high-performance VPN gateways
        Azure DNS-	Provides ultra-fast DNS responses and ultra-high domain availability
        Azure Content Delivery Network-	Delivers high-bandwidth content to customers globally
        Azure DDoS Protection-	Protects Azure-hosted applications from distributed denial of service (DDOS) attacks
        Azure Traffic Manager-	Distributes network traffic across Azure regions worldwide
        Azure ExpressRoute-	Connects to Azure over high-bandwidth dedicated secure connections
        Azure Network Watcher-	Monitors and diagnoses network issues using scenario-based analysis
        Azure Firewall-	Implements high-security, high-availability firewall with unlimited scalability
        Azure Virtual WAN-	Creates a unified wide area network (WAN), connecting local and remote sites

11. Databases
        Azure Cosmos DB-	Globally distributed database that supports NoSQL options
        Azure SQL Database-	Fully managed relational database with auto-scale, integral intelligence, and robust security
        Azure Database for MySQL-	Fully managed and scalable MySQL relational database with high availability and security
        Azure Database for PostgreSQL-	Fully managed and scalable PostgreSQL relational database with high availability and security
        SQL Server on VMs-	Host enterprise SQL Server apps in the cloud
        Azure SQL Data Warehouse-	Fully managed data warehouse with integral security at every level of scale at no extra cost
        Azure Database Migration Service-	Migrates your databases to the cloud with no application code changes
        Azure Cache for Redis-	Caches frequently used and static data to reduce data and application latency
        Azure Database for MariaDB-	Fully managed and scalable MariaDB relational database with high availability and security

12. Web services
        Azure App Service-	Quickly create powerful cloud web-based apps
        Azure Notification Hubs-	Send push notifications to any platform from any back end.
        Azure API Management-	Publish APIs to developers, partners, and employees securely and at scale.
        Azure Cognitive Search-	Fully managed search as a service.
        Web Apps feature of Azure App Service-	Create and deploy mission-critical web apps at scale.
        Azure SignalR Service-	Add real-time web functionalities easily.

13. IOT 
        IoT Central-	Fully-managed global IoT software as a service (SaaS) solution that makes it easy to connect, monitor, and manage your IoT assets at scale
        Azure IoT Hub-	Messaging hub that provides secure communications and monitoring between millions of IoT devices
        IoT Edge-	Data analysis models directly onto your IoT devices, allowing them to react quickly to state changes without needing to consult cloud-based AI models.

14. Big Data
        Azure SQL Data Warehouse-	Run analytics at a massive scale using a cloud-based Enterprise Data Warehouse (EDW) that leverages massive parallel processing (MPP) to run complex queries quickly across petabytes of data
        Azure HDInsight-	Process massive amounts of data with managed clusters of Hadoop clusters in the cloud
        Azure Databricks-	Collaborative Apache Spark–based analytics service that can be integrated with other Big Data services in Azure.

15. Machine Learning
        Azure Machine Learning Service-	Cloud-based environment you can use to develop, train, test, deploy, manage, and track machine learning models. It can auto-generate a model and auto-tune it for you. It will let you start training on your local machine, and then scale out to the cloud
        Azure Machine Learning Studio-	Collaborative, drag-and-drop visual workspace where you can build, test, and deploy machine learning solutions using pre-built machine learning algorithms and data-handling modules

16. Cognitive APIs
        Vision-	Image-processing algorithms to smartly identify, caption, index, and moderate your pictures and videos.
        Speech-	Convert spoken audio into text, use voice for verification, or add speaker recognition to your app.
        Knowledge mapping-	Map complex information and data in order to solve tasks such as intelligent recommendations and semantic search.
        Bing Search-	Add Bing Search APIs to your apps and harness the ability to comb billions of webpages, images, videos, and news with a single API call.
        Natural Language processing	- Allow your apps to process natural language with pre-built scripts, evaluate sentiment and learn how to recognize what users want.

17. DevOps
        Azure DevOps-	Azure DevOps Services (formerly known as Visual Studio Team Services, or VSTS), provides development collaboration tools including high-performance pipelines, free private Git repositories, configurable Kanban boards, and extensive automated and cloud-based load testing
        Azure DevTest Labs-	Quickly create on-demand Windows and Linux environments you can use to test or demo your applications directly from your deployment pipelines


Azure Cloud Shell
        Azure Cloud Shell is a browser-based command-line experience for managing and developing Azure resources.
        Think of Cloud Shell as an interactive console that you run in the cloud.

        Cloud Shell provides two experiences to choose from, Bash and PowerShell.
        Both include access to the Azure command-line interface called Azure CLI and to Azure PowerShell.

CLI commands to start and stop a web app in azure:
        az account list --output table
        az group list --output table
        az resource list \
            --resource-group learn-1e093b8c-a207-4e7f-b541-d99ec3f4045b \
            --resource-type Microsoft.Web/sites

        az webapp stop \
            --resource-group learn-1e093b8c-a207-4e7f-b541-d99ec3f4045b \
            --name <web app name>
        az webapp start \
            --resource-group learn-1e093b8c-a207-4e7f-b541-d99ec3f4045b \
            --name <web app name>

Azure Regions
    A region is a geographical area on the planet containing at least one,
    but potentially multiple datacenters that are nearby and networked together with a low-latency network

    *There are also some global Azure services that do not require you to select a particular region,
    such as Microsoft Azure Active Directory, Microsoft Azure Traffic Manager, and Azure DNS.

    Example:  West US, Canada Central, West Europe, Australia East, and Japan West

Special Azure regions:
    US DoD Central, US Gov Virginia, US Gov Iowa and more: These are physical and logical
     network-isolated instances of Azure for US government agencies and partners.
     These datacenters are operated by screened US persons and include additional compliance certifications.

    China East, China North and more: These regions are available through a unique partnership between Microsoft 
    and 21Vianet, whereby Microsoft does not directly maintain the datacenters.

Azure Geographies
        Geographies are broken up into the following areas:
        Americas
        Europe
        Asia Pacific
        Middle East and Africa

        Each region belongs to a single geography and has specific service availability, 
        compliance, and data residency/sovereignty rules applied to it

Availability Zones
        Availability Zones are physically separate datacenters within an Azure region.
        Each Availability Zone is made up of one or more datacenters equipped with independent power, cooling, and networking. 
        It is set up to be an isolation boundary. If one zone goes down, the other continues working. 
        Availability Zones are connected through high-speed, private fiber-optic networks.

        Not every region has support for Availability Zones. 
        The following regions have a minimum of three separate zones to ensure resiliency.

        Central US
        East US 2
        West US 2
        West Europe
        France Central
        North Europe
        Southeast Asia

        Availability Zones are primarily for VMs, managed disks, load balancers, and SQL databases. Azure services that support Availability Zones fall into two categories:

        Zonal services – you pin the resource to a specific zone (for example, virtual machines, managed disks, IP addresses)
        Zone-redundant services – platform replicates automatically across zones (for example, zone-redundant storage, SQL Database).

Region Pairs
        it's possible that a large enough disaster could cause an outage large enough to affect even two datacenters. 
        That's why Azure also creates region pairs.
        Each Azure region is always paired with another region within the same geography (such as US, Europe, or Asia) at least 300 miles away. 
        This approach allows for the replication of resources (such as virtual machine storage) across a geography that helps reduce the likelihood 
        of interruptions due to events such as natural disasters, civil unrest, power outages, or physical network outages affecting both regions at once. 
        If a region in a pair was affected by a natural disaster, for instance, services would automatically fail over to other region in i
                
SLAs 
        When combining SLAs across different service offerings, the resultant SLA is called a Composite SLA. 

        TThe composite SLA value for this application is:

        99.95 percent(Web App) × 99.99 percent(SQL DB) = 99.94 percent

        This means the combined probability of failure is higher than the individual SLA values. This isn't surprising,
        because an application that relies on multiple services has more potential failure points.

        Conversely, you can improve the composite SLA by creating independent fallback paths.
        For example, if SQL Database is unavailable, you can put transactions into a queue for processing at a later time.

 Resillency
        When designing your architecture you need to design for resiliency, and you should perform a Failure Mode Analysis (FMA). 
        The goal of an FMA is to identify possible points of failure and to define how the application will respond to those failures.

Feature preview categories
        There are two types of previews available:

        Private Preview. An Azure feature marked "private preview" is available to specific Azure customers for evaluation purposes.
        This is typically by invite only and issued directly by the product team responsible for the feature or service.
        Public Preview. An Azure feature marked "public preview" is available to all Azure customers for evaluation purposes.
        These previews can be turned on through the preview features page as detailed below.

Azure Compute in detailed
    Scaling VM using beow feature
    - Availability Sets
    - Virtual Machine ScaleSets
    = Azure Batch

Availability Sets: 
    An availability set is a logical grouping of two or more VMs that help keep your application 
    available during planned or unplanned maintenance.

    -Planned Maintainence: A planned maintenance event is when the underlying Azure fabric that hosts VMs is
        updated by Microsoft. A planned maintenance event is done to patch security vulnerabilities,
        improve performance, and add or update features. Most of the time these updates are done without
        any impact to the guest VMs. But sometimes VMs require a reboot to complete an update. When the VM is
        part of an availability set,

        VMs are put into different update domains. 
        Update domains indicate groups of VMs and underlying physical hardware that can be rebooted at the same time. 

    -Unplanned Maintainence: Unplanned maintenance events involve a hardware failure in the data center,
        such as a power outage or disk failure. VMs that are part of an availability set automatically switch to a
        working physical server so the VM continues to run. The group of virtual machines that share common hardware
        are in the same fault domain.

        A fault domain is essentially a rack of servers. 
        It provides the physical separation of your workload across different power, cooling, and network hardware that 
        support the physical servers in the data center server racks. 

- With an availability set, you get:

        1. Up to three fault domains that each have a server rack with dedicated power and network resources
        2. Five logical update domains which then can be increased to a maximum of 20

* There's no cost for an availability set. You only pay for the VMs within the availability set.
  We highly recommend that you place each workload in an availability set to avoid having a single point of failure in your VM architecture.

  https://docs.microsoft.com/en-gb/learn/modules/intro-to-azure-compute/3-virtual-machines

VIrtual Machine Scale Sets 
    Azure Virtual Machine Scale Sets let you create and manage a group of identical, load balanced VMs. 
    cale sets allow you to centrally manage, configure, and update a large number of VMs in minutes to provide
    highly available applications. 
    The number of VM instances can automatically increase or decrease in response to demand or a defined schedule. 
    With Virtual Machine Scale Sets, you can build large-scale services for areas such as compute, big data,
    and container workloads.

Azure Batch 

    Azure Batch enables large-scale job scheduling and compute management with the ability to scale to tens,
    hundreds, or thousands of VMs.

    When you're ready to run a job, Batch does the following:

        Starts a pool of compute VMs for you
        Installs applications and staging data
        Runs jobs with as many tasks as you have
        Identifies failures
        Requeues work
        Scales down the pool as work completes

Azure Containers

    - Azure Container Instances (ACI)
    - Azure Kubernetes Service (AKS)

Azure Container Instances (ACI)
     It is a PaaS offering that allows you to upload your containers and execute them directly with automatic elastic scale.

Azure Kubernetes Service AKS
    The task of automating, managing, and interacting with a large number of containers is known as orchestration. 
    Azure Kubernetes Service (AKS) is a complete orchestration service for containers with distributed architectures
    with multiple containers.


Azure App Service
    This platform as a service (PaaS) allows you to focus on the website and API logic
    while Azure handles the infrastructure to run and scale your web application

    Cost: 
    You pay for the Azure compute resources your app uses while it
     processes requests based on the App Service Plan you choose.

     Types of Web Apps
        With Azure App Service, you can host most common web app styles including:

            Web Apps
            API Apps
            WebJobs
            Mobile Apps


Azure serverless Compute
        Azure has two implementations of serverless compute:

        1. Azure Functions, which can execute code in almost any modern language.
        2. Azure Logic Apps, which are designed in a web-based designer and can execute logic triggered by Azure services without writing any code.

        Where Functions execute code, Logic Apps execute workflows designed to automate business scenarios and built from predefined logic blocks.

        You create Logic App workflows using a visual designer on the Azure portal or in Visual Studio.
         The workflows are persisted as a JSON file with a known workflow schema



*****Azure Data Storage***** 
https://docs.microsoft.com/en-gb/learn/modules/intro-to-data-in-azure/3-how-azure-storage-meets-your-business-storage-needs   
Types of Data:
        Structured Data - SQL
        Semi-Structured Data - NoSQL
        unstructured data - Blob - PDFs DOcs , JSON file, image etc

Azure SQL Storage
        You can migrate your existing SQL Server databases with minimal downtime using the 
        Azure Database Migration Service. The service uses the Microsoft Data Migration Assistant to
        generate assessment reports that provide recommendations to help guide you through required 
        changes prior to performing a migration.

Azure Cosmos DB - NoSQL DB
Azure BLOB storage - Azure Blob storage lets you stream large video or audio files directly to the user's browser from anywhere in the world. Blob storage is also used to store data for backup, disaster recovery, and archiving.
                    It has the ability to store up to 8 TB of data for virtual machines.
Azure Data Lake Storage
    The Data Lake feature allows you to perform analytics on your data usage and prepare reports. Data Lake is a large repository that stores both structured and unstructured data.
    Azure Data Lake Storage combines the scalability and cost benefits of object storage with the reliability and performance of the Big Data file system capabilities.

Azure Files
    Azure Files offers fully managed file shares in the cloud that are accessible via the industry standard Server Message Block (SMB) protocol. 

Azure Queue Storage
    Azure Queue Storage can be used to help build flexible applications and separate functions for better durability
    across large workloads. When application components are decoupled, they can scale independently. 
    Queue storage provides asynchronous message queueing for communication between application components, 
    whether they are running in the cloud, on the desktop, on-premises, or on mobile devices.

    You can use queue storage to:
        Create a backlog of work and to pass messages between different Azure web servers.
        Distribute load among different web servers/infrastructure and to manage bursts of traffic.
        Build resilience against component failure when multiple users access your data at the same time.

Azure Disk Storage 
    Disk storage provides disks for virtual machines, applications, and other services to access and use as they need, similar to how they would in on-premises scenarios.
    Disk storage allows data to be persistently stored and accessed from an attached virtual hard disk.
    When working with VMs, you can use standard SSD and HDD disks for less critical workloads,
    and premium SSD disks for mission-critical production applications. 

Storage Tiers 
    Azure offers three storage tiers for blob object storage:
        Hot storage tier: optimized for storing data that is accessed frequently.
        Cool storage tier: optimized for data that are infrequently accessed and stored for at least 30 days.
        Archive storage tier: for data that are rarely accessed and stored for at least 180 days with flexible latency requirements.

Ecryption and Replication of Storage

Encryption for storage services
        The following encryption types are available for your resources:

        - Azure Storage Service Encryption (SSE) for data at rest helps you secure your data to meet the organization's security and regulatory compliance. It encrypts the data before storing it and decrypts the data before retrieving it.
            The encryption and decryption are transparent to the user.
        - Client-side encryption is where the data is already encrypted by the client libraries. Azure stores the data in the encrypted state at rest, which is then decrypted during retrieval.

Replication for storage availability
    A replication type is set up when you create a storage account.
     The replication feature ensures that your data is durable and always available.